# Assignment

> Are there systems for which the “whole is greater than the sum of its parts” or is this just a matter of perspective?

## Summary

Each of Krakauer, Kauffman, and Hoel offer comprehensive explanations and useful complementary tools to scientifically discriminate within collectives and between individuals. Yet, when taken together, the combination appears to have far more explanatory power. I propose a synthesis of the three, called Kantian individuals, a construct which, through initial thought testing, appears to offer a more satisfyingly complete organization with several possible scientific uses. As this is a homework assignment, I also identify some (of likely many) ways in which this synthesis needs additional development.

## Article

What is a whole and what is a part? Here, I will examine three recent approaches from the field of complexity science that address this question, and attempt a synthesis of the three to answer the question.

David Krakauer's *The Information Theory of Individuality*^1 ^2 points out the many deficiencies of defining the individual through biology alone, raising issues of nested collectivity that have defied solution for centuries of organized scholarship. Krakauer turns to information theory based on Shannon, but rather than applying it first at the individual level and zooming out, he immediately turns to the signal generated by collectives.

The key insight is that collectives can not only generate but preserve information, in the Shannon sense, over periods of time and regardless of any biological encapsulation they might exhibit. This application, along with a relaxation of unnecessary preconditions, yields surprising results:

> Individuality can be continuous... Individuality can emerge at any level of organization... Individuality can be nested. Given that life is hierarchically organized into trophic and functional levels, we allow the possibility of multiple, parallel levels of individuality. ^3

Thus, both our *Manu-o-Kū* and the *ulu* it flies in are information-generating individuals that create and (for some amount of time) preserve information.^4 We might name bird and flock alike. Collective organizations ranging from social structures to particle swarms can be individuals of a type. The article lays out a framework for "Forms of individuality,"^5 though this seems more effective at extensivity than distinguishment.

Of our articles I feel most confident about the propositions of Krakauer, but the least consoled by its ramifications. At first glance, it is hard to read the article in any other way than diminishing individuality---or at least reporting that many of our preconceptions about individuality were, perhaps, wishful thinking. 

Krakauer leaves the lines between individuals and collectives uncomfortably blurred, at least from an anthropocentric perspective. ^6 None of this serves to invalidate the information theory of individuality, but it might leave the reader searching for more. Surely there is something distinguishing flock from bird

...

In *Is the emergence of life and of agency expected?*, Stuart Kauffman ^7 reaches an affirmative conclusion by connecting the state of the art in a particular kind of chemistry with the imperative for constraint closure shared by all organisms, and then by assigning this arrangement to a concept in philosophical logic called the "Kantian whole." Not everyone will be familiar with the concept; we will circle back to it after some discussion of the hardware involved.

Autocatalysis is a specific kind of chemical process wherein the molecules involved loop back to each other (`a` plus `b` produces two of `c`, and then `c` plus `b` produces two of `a`, for instance). This condition can not only lead to expansive repetition of the reaction---it *necessarily* does so under the right conditions (in our example: copious amounts of `b` and some energy for stirring). 

Autocatalytic reactions have been shown in laboratory experiments to reliably produce, over time, phase changes in chemical complexity sufficient to reliably yield the organic molecules understood to be the building blocks of life. Connections have been made by various authors to various later-order phase changes leading up to the development of polymers, RNA and DNA, plasmids, and other macromolecular forms.

At each rung of the ladder, we have catalytic closure, in which the chemical reactions required for the sustained existence of the system are self-catalyzing. However, once we reach the cellular level, we have a new kind of closure: constraint closure. 

The cell not only accounts for all the reactions it needs to continue surviving, but builds the parts for which it is necessary that are in turn necessary for it to continue to exist. When compared with the catalytic closure of reactions, constraint closure can be seen simply as an additional channel of directed work toward maintaining the self.

As promised, this constraint closure gives rise to our logic construct, the Kantian whole: an entity in which the "self" refers to self-determinism:

> A Kantian whole [37] has the property that the parts exist (in the Universe) for and by means of the whole. You are a Kantian whole. You exist for and by means of your organs—heart and liver and genes. They exist for and by means of being parts of you, the whole. ^8

"Kantian" refers to Immanuel Kant, who proposed the idea that would be later named for him in his *Critique of Judgement*.^9 While Kauffman is one of increasingly many complexity theorists interested in self-determinism and Kantian wholes, the 2025 paper represents a current and particularly vigorous application.

Kauffman's work seems simultaneously bold and settling; it is the most simple of the three frameworks we have here, and there is little to take from it but the core concept. Still, if we accept Kantian wholes on their own, we continue to have trouble identifying the individuals we typically care about: after all, human beings include in their dominion trillions of non-self entities, all of them seemingly qualifying as Kantian wholes.

We might here put together Kauffman and Krakauer, and the resulting composite of information-sustaining constraint-closed entities is an encouraging step toward an individual we might discern from a collective. However, it still seems there is something missing in the juncture: what do we have to distinguish between the many layers of the organism so that we can find its leader? We have found the bird in the flock, but how do we find the Bird in the bird?

...

Erik Hoel's article *When the Map Is Better Than the Territory* ^10 proposes (and name-brands) Causal Emergence, a framework that attracted approximately equal parts interest and argument for a few years thereafter for some of its core details. In response, he reformulated his system in 2025's aptly-named *Causal Emergence 2.0: Quantifying emergent complexity*.^10 From that title, it will be no surprise that Hoel's focus is on the relationship between the entity and the time and reality it belongs to.

Hoel begins *2.0* with an analogy; since causality can be a bit of a tricky subject, we can do so here as well. Consider a thermostat in a room. If the room becomes colder than the thermostatʻs setting, a signal will be triggered and the heater will turn on. ^11

We can say with more or less perfect confidence that this will happen, but how do we know? From a purely reductionist, physical view of the universe, we would need to chart every path of every atom of every air molecule in the room to know when the correct number of strikes will be made on the bent tungsten mechanism of the temperature sensor to move the thermostat into a new phase of operation. 

But, of course, we do not know the paths of any of the air molecules, and in fact they could be scrambled up and still the furnace would start.

Hoel uses this analogy to point out that in many complex systems, the details donʻt actually matter to the cause and effect of things. In our case a number of people did things culminating in somebody setting a dial. The minor details of the system, like the expansion of air and the bending of metal, Hoel would ascribe as "causally degenerate," in context (measurably!) unimportant to the major events of the system. On the other hand, he would assign the context scale of the human setting the thermostat as "causally primitive;" necessary and sufficient for our roomʻs temperature.

> Individual scales, even in most cases the microscale, are simply slices of a higher-dimensional object, but only a slim minority of these scales are causally relevant, and the theory can identify them, revealing the hierarchy that matters to a system’s causal workings. ^13

There is quite a bit more to this article, but it appears at first glance that this is precisely the context that we needed. The macroscale of our bird---our Bird, for Hoel, is not just an informational summary of all the constituent parts of the animal; it is a mathematically distinct determiner of the path the animal carves through space and time. 

So, to recap:

- Krakauer: Measurable information is generated and maintained by collectives composed of individuals. These memories and their perpetuation defines individuals.
- Kauffman: Kantian wholes are a particular kind of individual that embody constraint closure to construct and maintain themselves. We and our biological kin are Kantian wholes.
- Hoel: A system can be viewed as a bundle of variously-scaled contextual slices, each with different values for causal effect. We measure these slices to find the scale primarily responsible for the phenomena we observe.

Let's consider them altogether.

Individuality is continuous (rather than discrete), organized, and nested, applying to information producing systems in our universe. Some individuals are Kantian wholes, which are inherently individuals, but distinguished from other individuals as being both a product of themselves and a cause unto themselves. Some Kantian wholes are themselves composed of other Kantian wholes. We can further distinguish within these compositions by characterizing causal effects of each member of the composition of the Kantian wholes, assigning causal primacy to the organizational level driving the greatest effects. 

I propose to call that individual a **Kantian individual**.

By combining our theorists we have our bird from our flock and our Bird of our bird. Our Bird is a Kantian individual. It has agency and can fly free---at least until it sees another collective with which to make memories.

...

## Thought Experiments

Here we can consider ideas that might both support this synthesis and help further refine it.

### Tests

Each of these tests are designed to be applied to a candidate entity.

| Criterion | I | KW | KI |
|-----|----|-------------|---|
| Preserves information | N | N | N |
| Mortal parts | U | N | N |
| Causal determiner | U | U | N |

I: Individual
KW: Kantian Whole
KI: Kantian Individual

N: Necessary
U: Unnecessary

#### Test Descriptions

- Preserves information: generates information (Shannon entropy) in the universe and stores the pattern
- Mortal parts: If the whole dies or discontinues, do the constituents die or discontinue?
- Causal determiner: Is this a macrostate that is more effective of predicting the future than some subordinated microstate?

### Samples

| Sample entity | Putative Classification |
|-----------|-------------------------------------|
| Birds | Kantian Individual |
| Bees | Kantian Whole |
| Beehive | Individual |
| Queen bee | TBD |    # Need to think about it
| People | Kantian Individual |
| Single Cell Organisms | Kantian Individual |
| Humans "self-cells" | Kantian Whole |
| Flocks | Individual |
| Stock Markets | Individual |
| Corporations | ??? |
| LLMs | Individual? |
| Chickens | Kantian Individual |
| Particles | Particle |
| Great Red Spot | Individual |
| SciPy | Individual |
| Human + LLM pair | Individual |    # A collective!
| AGI | Kantian Individual |   # A proposal


### As for the assignment prompt:

As far as colloquialisms go, "the whole is greater than the sum of the parts," is both more accurate and more useful than many others. More profound than most sayings, or so it would seem.

### Conclusion

The concept of Kantian individuals appears to me to be useful in a variety of settings where collective behavior is under examination. There are many fields of study wrestling with the topics involved, and applying such a framework to the complexity practice of agent-based modeling could be a desirable improvement in conceptual clarity. 

Undiscussed here: there are degrees of mathematical formalism and experimentation in each of the papers that would be interesting to attempt to reconcile.

I hope to continue exploring the topic and would welcome feedback.

## Notes

1 In this discussion I address the three systems by their leading proponents: Krakauer, Kauffman, and Hoel. This seems a convenient way to communicate. Two of the articles have other contributors, as can be seen in the References, and presumably all three authors have had assistance over the development of their systems. Nonetheless, I believe it is the case that each of the three is unmistakably the causal lead of their respective theories.

2 Particularly p. 209-212.

3 p. 211.

4 While flocks (*ulu manu*) of *manu-o-Kū* are admittedly short-lived, they occur predictably by season. The birds themselves are lovely.

5 p. 215.

6 It is well-known that the human brain is largely rewritten after birth and very early childhood. Consider: why we don't go all through life horrified by what was likely the very traumatic process of being born? The answer is that humans do not retain information from that stage of life; as a result of growth of the brain, all of our memories and understanding are effectively reinitialized through rapid neuroplastic development. The ramifications of this in the context of Krakauer are interesting: we might infer that each of us has effectively lived as (at least) two distinct Krakauer individuals at some point in time. The rest of this synthesis is on the other hand reassuring, I think.

7 p. 1-11.

8 p. 7.

9 The often-cited work on the topic of Kant and the sciences is Weber, A., & Varela, F. (2002). Life after kant: Natural purposes and the autopoietic foundations of biological individuality. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 97–125.

10 This passage draws largely but not entirely from the later work, particularly p. 1-13.

11 p. 11.

12 p. 12.

### Other notes

- The Hoel system reads as too vertical and and insufficiently horizontal, in a manner that could be explained by anthropomorphizing. While this does not seem intractable or disqualifying, either might be possible.

- I suppose I have ordered the theorists from least agency implied to most agency implied. There is *some* order, anyway.

- Cryptic Kantian individuals (After Krakauer's "chimeric individuals")^^p.211 seems a parallel and interesting avenue to explore.

## References

Hoel, E. (2017). When the Map Is Better Than the Territory. Entropy, 19(5), 188. https://doi.org/10.3390/e19050188

Hoel, E. (2025). Causal Emergence 2.0: Quantifying emergent complexity (No. arXiv:2503.13395). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.13395

Kant, I. (2000). Critique of the power of judgment (P. Guyer & E. Mathews, Trans.; P. Guyer, Ed.). Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1790)

Kauffman, S., & Roli, A. (2025). Is the emergence of life and of agency expected? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 380(1936), 20240283. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2024.0283

Krakauer, D., Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Flack, J. C., & Ay, N. (2020). The information theory of individuality. Theory in Biosciences, 139(2), 209–223. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12064-020-00313-7